Thank you for coming.
This is a session on Audio Processing
and Sequencing Services.
And just before I bring Chris Rogers up,
who's going to be doing
most of the conversation,
I just thought I'd welcome you.
My name's Bill Stewart.
I'm the Engineering Manager of
the Quario team.
If you missed the talk yesterday,
we talked just very briefly
about the audio hardware layer
that we have in Mac OS X.
And all of this sort of fits in the
general frame of what we call Core Audio.
And aside from the audio hardware stuff,
yesterday we talked about the
default output unit as a way of very
easily having your application get
sound out the current output devices
selected by the control panel.
So what we're going to be doing
today is to talk about audio units,
and Chris will go
through that in a moment.
And the default output
unit is one of them.
So if you were at the talk
yesterday and a little bit confused
about where all that fits in,
you should be quite clear
by the end of this talk,
we hope.
So without any further ado,
I'll bring Chris Rogers up
from the Quario team.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I'm pleased to be here to speak
with you a little bit about some
of the higher level services
available for audio on Mac OS X.
Overview of the talk is,
first thing I'm going to talk
about is Audio Unit Architecture.
Audio Units are components for
processing audio or just dealing
with audio in some general manner.
Then I'm going to talk
about the Audio Toolbox,
hooking Audio Units together
and processing graphs.
Lastly,
I'll be speaking about some timing and
scheduling services that are available
using the Music Sequencing Services.
Let's take a look at where these higher
level services sit in our audio stack.
Audio Units are one level above
the core Audio How APIs which
Jeff spoke about yesterday.
Then above that we have what are
known as the AU Graph Services,
which are a set of APIs for
connecting these Audio Units together.
And the Music Sequencing
Services we'll see can talk
to AU Graphs and Audio Units.
and Core MIDI is off to the side there.
And later on,
Doug will be going over that in quite
some detail and actually showing how
there are some relationships between
the MIDI services and some of the
Audio Unit technology that we provide.
So audio units are components,
components that are handled
by the component manager that
QuickTime makes wide use of.
Like all components,
individual components are
identified by a four character type,
subtype, and identifier field,
and the component manager can
query the list of available
components of a given type.
Audio units are the ones
we're interested in this case,
so you can call find next component to go
through the list of available components.
Then once you've gotten to the one
that you're interested in opening,
you can call open a component,
and to close it,
you call close component.
The component manager has some
pretty good documentation,
so you can refer to our
developer documentation about
the component manager for that.
The Audio Unit component, in general,
it generates, receives, processes,
translates, or otherwise manipulates
streams of audio,
as I have in my slide.
And they're good
high-level building blocks.
They can be connected together to
create networks of audio processing.
And you can also use
them singly and just,
for instance,
instantiate a software synth
and wire it up so this output
goes directly to the hardware.
We provide a set of Audio Units
that ships with OS X and we'll
be adding more in the future,
in future releases.
And developers are free to
create their own Audio Units.
And we'll be providing an
SDK to make that a lot easier
than it would be otherwise.
So what kinds of Audio Units are there?
There are Audio Units that
just provide audio data.
So they're sources.
They have no inputs to them.
An example of that type of
Audio Unit would be what's
known as a Music Device.
It's a software synthesizer.
And Apple ships a DLS2 sound font
compliant software synth in OS X.
Also there are Audio Units which
interface with the hardware.
They provide a higher level
abstraction of hardware I/O devices.
So they talk to the audio HAL.
And one of the most common
types of Audio Units are in
the category of DSP processors.
Reverbs, filters, mixers,
this type of thing.
So these type of Audio Units typically,
they take input and process it
somehow and output the audio stream.
Another kind of Audio Units
is the Audio Processing Unit.
This is a kind of Audio Processing
Unit that's used to process audio.
It's a kind of audio processing
unit that's used to process audio.
And one of the main types of
Audio Unit is Format Converter.
Converting between 16 bits,
floating point,
interleaving stereo streams
into discrete mono streams,
sample rate converters,
and there are quite a
few other types as well.
And then another class is what I call
an adapter class of Audio Unit.
And this is a little bit strange
because it doesn't actually process
the audio in any way using DSP.
It also doesn't change the
format of the audio stream.
But But instead,
it somehow does some other
kind of impedance matching
between the input and output.
For instance,
it may do some kind of internal buffering
so that the input buffer size is
different from the output buffer size.
Or it may lay on top of a thread
scheduling scheme so that everything
before that Audio Unit in the chain
would get deferred to another thread.
And this way you could potentially
take advantage of multiprocessing.
on multiprocessor machines.
It's a very interesting application.
I guess we're going to try
running a little demo here.
I should probably explain a
little bit what I've done.
Oh, this is your demo.
Okay.
So if we can have the machine up.
I can't see anything.
Oh, neither can you.
I can see this.
Okay, let me just get this to run.
So,
So what I'm actually running
here is a Java program.
The Java program is quite simple.
This is very interesting,
trying to do it this way.
This is just demonstrating how to
use the component description and
the component services from Java.
It's the same as you would do in C.
As we've been talking
about in the sessions,
you have both a Java and a C API to this.
So I thought it might be interesting
just to show you some simple
Java code that is quite clear about
the concept of what we're doing.
We create a component description.
This describes to the component manager
the type of components we're looking for.
The type is a K audio unit type.
And then what I'm going to do here
is I've just told it to look for
the first component of this type.
And I'll use the AU component,
which is actually in
this package in Java.
And this will find the first one.
Then I'm going to print out
some information about it.
And then I'm going to keep
finding the next component from
the one that I've already found.
And until I don't find any more,
and then my program finishes.
So this will give you an idea of
the audio units that we ship with
the current version of this system.
So there's delay, some filters,
there's a matrix reverb, interleavers,
deinterleavers, a mixer unit.
There's the DLS music device.
You can see it's type, subtype,
manufacturer.
The audio device output,
the default output unit,
which is actually an extension of the
basic unit that will talk to any device.
The default output device will track a
default output that the user might set.
And various others.
Thanks.
I'll go back to the slides.
And of course I can't see my screen.
Okay, just before the demo,
I went over some of the
categories of Audio Units.
This is just a little simple diagram
showing that an Audio Unit is
basically a box that can have
an arbitrary number of inputs,
arbitrary number of outputs.
I think this diagram is showing that
DSPFX would have both inputs and outputs
with some kind of processing going on.
Software synth music device may
only have outputs because it's
actually synthesizing sound.
It's creating it from scratch.
A default output unit,
which Doug talked about yesterday,
it would just take inputs and it would
send that audio to a hardware device.
Um,
we'll talk about audio unit properties.
Properties are very,
very fundamental to the
way that audio units work,
and a very general and extensible way to
pass information to and from audio units.
Audio units themselves,
they implement a very small set of, um,
functions, which you,
which can be called to deal
with getting audio in and out,
and setting parameters, and so on.
But we created this property mechanism
to allow audio units to be extensible,
so when we come up with some new feature
that audio units need to implement,
we can always, um, use the, uh,
the property APIs and pass in
data via void star pointer,
and, uh,
the length of the data is indicated by a,
a byte size parameter.
The, we define several
different properties today,
and the type of property is identified
by an audio unit property ID.
It's just a 32-bit integer.
Uh, both the MIDI APIs and the
AudioHAL APIs also support
this concept of properties.
It's almost identical type of
mechanism in the API between the three.
Secondary to the property identifier,
identifying which property,
we have addressing within the
Audio Unit to specify which part of the
Audio Unit is to deal with the property.
So there's a scope, which can be global,
input, output, or group.
Global means that the property
applies to the Audio Unit as a whole.
Input scope means the property
applies to a particular input.
Output is pretty clear.
And group is a particular
type of scope that is relevant
for software synthesizers,
music devices.
The Audio Unit element is an index
specifying which particular input,
output, or group we're identifying.
So if we want to talk
to input number two,
then this argument would be two.
Or actually, it would probably be two.
Depending on how we're numbering,
starting at one or zero.
The IDs are defined in
AudioUnitProperties.h.
It's important to understand what the
data formats of the properties are.
We're just passing information as a void
star pointer and a length parameter.
You have to understand
the structure of the data.
Those data formats are defined
also in the header file.
We have a couple properties
defined right now.
Additional properties
will be added as needed.
Developers are free to implement
their own private properties
for their own AudioUnits.
There's a range of reserved
property IDs for that.
All AudioUnits should support
the general system properties.
So yesterday at Jeff's talk,
somebody was interested in
knowing about the performance
capabilities of our system.
And somebody asked about, well,
how many audio units can
you connect together?
And is there going to be a problem?
The KAudioUnitPropertyFastDispatch
property is a way of getting
access to function pointers which
call directly into the Audio Unit.
This bypasses the
ComponentManagerDispatchOverhead
that is typically incurred.
Basically, you're just dealing with
function call overhead when
you're doing your processing.
It's no different from any other kind of
DSP you might be doing in your own code.
So really, the time,
the bandwidth limiting factor is
the actual DSP that is occurring.
So the answer to the question of how many
units can you string together is really
a function of how much processing are
you doing among all these Audio Units.
It's not a limitation of
the Audio Units themselves.
This particular property can
be used as an optimization,
but you're not required to use it.
Here's the second example of a property.
And that's the
The K Music Device Property Sound Bank,
FSSpec.
This is a way of telling the
software synthesizer which
sample bank it should use.
So you identify the sample bank
with an FSSpec pointer and you
pass that information in by
calling AudioUnitSetProperty.
The first argument is the
actual component instance.
The second argument is the property ID,
the Sound Bank FSSpec ID.
Then it's global scope because it
applies to the synth as a whole.
The element doesn't really matter
in the case of global scope.
Second to last argument is pointer
to the file spec and then the size of
the data is the size of the FSSpec.
So that shows you how you can
communicate property information to an
AudioUnit with AudioUnitSetProperty.
And all properties are
dealt with in a similar way.
Of course the specifics of
what the property information
is and what it does will vary.
Parameters are less for configuring
attributes of Audio Units and more
for changing real-time control points.
And we have the Audio Unit Get parameter
and Audio Unit Set parameter
functions for this.
It allows real-time control
of processing algorithms.
The parameters are identified with
Audio Unit Parameter ID and the value
is a 32-bit floating point number.
And these parameters are very similar
to MIDI continuous controllers,
but they're much more resolute.
They're 32-bit floating point numbers
as I pointed out and it's much,
much higher resolution
than a 7-bit MIDI value.
The Set Parameter function includes a
timestamp allowing the Audio Unit to
schedule the parameter change for a very
specific time within a buffer of audio.
So the timestamp is in units
of sample frames on the next
buffer of audio to be processed.
An Audio Unit supplies its list
of supported parameters with the
kAudioUnitPropertyParameterList.
Individual parameters can be queried
with the ParameterInfo property.
Information such as the
name of the parameter,
what units the parameter uses,
whether that be Hertz, Cents, Decibels,
whatever.
Min, Max,
and Default value for that parameter.
And some flags as well.
The information provided by this
property could be used by a client
to put up some kind of user interface
representing this particular parameter.
So if the parameter represents
volume in decibels or
something like that from maybe,
I don't know, minus 150 decibels up
to 0 dB or who knows,
the control is actually able to
display the units and the minimum
and maximum value appropriately.
Audio Units are in one of several
states and it's important to
understand the state transitions
that Audio Units go through.
When an Audio Unit is first
opened with Open a Component,
it's considered to be in the open state.
Once the component is closed,
then it doesn't even exist anymore.
So that's kind of like the base
level constructor/destructor,
if you're thinking in
object-oriented terms.
But there's an additional
level of construction and
destruction in Audio Units.
That's the initialized
and uninitialized state.
And we have the Audio Unit initialized
and Audio Unit uninitialized
functions for that.
Once the Audio Unit is initialized,
you can actually start it
running with Audio Unit start.
And that applies specifically to
I/O Audio Units such as the Default
Output Unit to actually start the
hardware through the Audio HAL.
So, let's go into a little more detail
about what's the difference between
just opening the component in the
first place and initializing it.
It seems like it's the same thing.
Well, when you open the component,
you have a component instance and
you can make calls to the component,
but at this time,
the component is not expected to allocate
any significant amount of resources,
such as memory.
But you are able to make property
calls to the Audio Unit to
configure it in some particular way.
For example,
you might want to configure its
sample rate or bit depth or maybe
you're interested in setting up some
other aspect of the Audio Unit before
you actually initialize it.
Then once you call Audio Unit Initialize
and you've made your property calls
to configure it just like you want,
then the appropriate allocations
can occur optimizing for the
particular configuration.
So if you're configuring a
reverb for a certain number of
delays or something like that,
it's able to allocate exactly
the amount of memory it needs.
[Transcript missing]
This is when audio is
actually being processed.
It's actually going through
from input to output.
Audio Unit or the hardware is running,
whatever the case may be.
The Audio Output Unit implements
the Audio Unit Start and
Audio Unit Stop functions.
If you have a graph of
Audio Units connected together,
this is where
The Audio Actually Starts
Being Processed or Stops Being Processed.
The Audio Output Unit generally
represents the terminal
node in a connection.
And as Doug talked about a bit yesterday,
the default Audio Unit,
it starts the hardware device that
the Audio HAL is connected to.
Here's another API to Audio Unit Reset.
It basically is used when
an Audio Unit is initialized
and it may even be running.
But if you want to clear
the state of the Audio Unit,
it's typically used with DSP Audio Units.
So for delay effects,
you would clear the delay line.
For reverbs,
you would clear out the reverb memory.
For filters, you clear the filter state.
And this is important.
If the graph is actively
processing audio,
but you perhaps reposition the playhead
to a different part in the audio stream,
and you don't want reverb tail from
is the Director of the
Java Processing Unit.
He will be speaking at
the end of the session.
Audio Unit I/O Management Audio Units
process audio or deal with
audio using a pull I/O model.
And what I mean by that is
that there's a function,
a particular function you
call to read the audio output
stream from the Audio Unit.
And when you do that,
the Audio Unit has to go
and fetch its audio input.
So it typically does that by
calling the same function on the
output of another Audio Unit.
And then that Audio Unit has to
get its audio input from somewhere.
So if you imagine a chain of
these Audio Units connected
together one after the other,
you would pull on the very end one and
in turn it would go down the chain.
Each one would fetch its input
from the one before and you pull
the audio through the chain.
It's possible to connect
these Audio Units up in more
complicated configurations
than just simple linear chains,
but the idea is still the same.
Audio Unit I/O Management Audio Units
process audio or deal with audio input.
process audio or deal with audio input
Audio Units specify their number of
inputs and outputs through properties.
The format of the audio data is
canonically n-channel interleaved audio.
Or it could be sideband data
such as spectral analysis data.
This is linear PCM 32-bit floating point.
Okay, I've been talking about connecting
these Audio Units together and this
is just a picture showing that.
I'm going to talk about how to
get audio into an Audio Unit and
then I'm going to talk about how
to get audio out of an Audio Unit.
There are two ways to provide an
Audio Unit with its audio data.
The first way is using a property
called kAudioUnitPropertyMakeConnection.
With this property, you specify a source
Audio Unit and its output number.
And then that connection is made and
the Audio Unit knows that it's to read
its audio data for a particular input
from another Audio Unit's output.
A second way of providing audio
data to an Audio Unit is by
registering a Client Callback.
This is the standard sort of callback
that we get in the Audio Howler,
in the Sound Manager,
or in many other audio systems,
such as ASIO.
Using this method,
the Client just specifies
a callback function,
and then every buffer slice cycle,
this callback function is called,
and the Client is able to
provide the audio or a particular
input of an audio unit.
In the case where Audio Units
have multiple inputs,
each input may be configured separately
using either of these two methods.
So if an Audio Unit has two inputs,
the first may be connected to the
output of another Audio Unit and
the second input may be
[Transcript missing]
So, I've just gone over two ways
that you provide audio input
data to the Audio Unit.
Now, it's important to understand
how do you actually get the
rendered audio out of the output.
And you have to use the
Audio Unit Render/Slice
function call for this.
It pulls the audio or reads audio
from a particular Audio Unit output.
And it must be called once per output.
So if there are three outputs,
then it would be called three times.
Each audio output can be an n-channel
interleaved stream like I said before.
So it's possible that an Audio Unit might
just have one output and provide
actually eight discrete channels
internally in that one output.
I'm going to go over some of
the important arguments to the
Audio Unit Render Slice function.
It's actually very similar to
the Audio HAL callback arguments.
The Audio Timestamp is exactly the
same Audio Timestamp structure as in
Audio HAL and it specifies the start time
of the buffer that is to be rendered.
It provides information about the
current host time of the machine or
the host time that corresponds to
the start of the buffer along with
the sample time that corresponds to.
It also provides information about the
current host time of the system and
how to synchronize other system events
such as MIDI events which use this
host time to the audio stream which
are synchronizing based on sample time.
The Audio Buffer argument is where
you can pass a buffer that you
expect the Audio Unit to render into.
Or, optionally, you can pass a null for
this and it will pass back a
returned buffer that it caches.
The Audio Buffer is also a
structure used in the Audio HAL.
We share the same data structures
between the high level and the low
level parts of the audio stack.
So with Audio Unit Render Slice,
it's optionally possible to schedule
events before a given I/O cycle.
So before Audio Unit Render
Slice is called,
you may want to do some scheduling.
Parameter changes with
Audio Unit Set Parameter,
or in the case of Software Synthesis,
you might want to schedule some
notes to start or stop playing
during that slice of audio.
So there's this two-phase
schedule render model.
In step one, you would schedule events,
and in step two,
you call Audio Unit Render Slice.
[Transcript missing]
It's an optional callback
that a client can install on
an output of an Audio Unit,
which gets called before rendering
occurs and after rendering occurs.
So every time that
Audio Unit render slice is called,
The Audio Unit will call
this notification callback,
perform its rendering,
and then call the callback again
to say that it's done rendering.
This allows the client who installs this
notification to perform arbitrary tasks.
Some examples would be scheduling,
which you might do in
exactly the same way as...
as I described here
before every render slice.
Another use that you might make of this
is to perform CPU load measurement.
You can actually measure the
time that the Audio Unit takes
to perform its rendering.
How do you write one?
Audio Units are components,
the same kind of components
that have been used in
QuickTime for a very long time.
Anybody who is familiar with writing
components in QuickTime should
be able to get up and running
pretty quickly with Audio Units.
For people who haven't
written components before,
it can be a little bit difficult
unless you have some help.
We have an SDK that
makes this very simple.
All you really have to do is
override one or two basic functions.
Um...
and in fact, at the base level,
you really only have to override one,
and that's the function which
does your actual DSP processing.
[Transcript missing]
This SDK will be placed
on our website soon,
in the next few days we hope.
So, I'm finished talking about
Audio Units at the lower level.
I'm going to talk about AUGraph.
It stands for Audio Unit Graph.
And this is a set of APIs for
connecting these components together.
represents a high level representation
of a set of audio units and
the connections between them.
It allows you to construct
arbitrary signal paths,
fairly arbitrary anyway,
and represents a modular routing system.
And it can deal with
large numbers of them.
Why use AUGraph?
One of the reasons is that connections
and disconnections between the audio
units can be performed while audio is
actually being pulled through the chain.
If you are talking to the
audio units at the lower level,
you have to take great care
at changing connections,
making connections and disconnections
while the audio is being pulled through.
You can get all kinds
of bad things happening.
There's a lot of
synchronization involved.
AUGraph takes care of this for you.
Another reason you might want to
use AUGraph is that it maintains
the representation of the
graph even when the audio units
themselves are not instantiated.
It also takes care of and embodies
the state that the audio units are in,
as we'll see.
AU Node is the primary object
that's represented in an AU Graph.
An AU node actually represents a
particular Audio Unit in the graph,
whether that Audio Unit is
instantiated yet or not.
It's a placeholder
representing that Audio Unit.
To create a node,
you can call auGraphNewNode.
The next argument to this
function is Component Description,
which specifies the type, subtype,
and ID of the component.
This information that you would
get from Find Next Component
to Component Manager Call.
It's also possible to pass
what we call Class Data to
initialize an Audio Unit with.
And we'll talk about that in a minute.
AU Graph Remove node just
takes it out of the graph.
To create connections
between these nodes,
once you've added a bunch of nodes,
you've got Connect Node Input,
Disconnect Node Input,
Clear Connections that clears
all the connections in the graph,
and Update for synchronizing
real-time changes.
You can also walk through
the graph and look at all the
nodes with Get Node Count,
Get Node, Get Node Info.
These are in the AUGraph.h header
file in our Audio Toolbox framework.
I think that the APIs are
fairly self-explanatory if
you're looking at header files,
so we're not going to go into
detail with all the arguments.
Just like the Audio Units themselves,
the AUGraph mirrors the state
of the Audio Units in them.
This slide is just pretty much
going over what I talked about.
Um...
The important thing is that
the AUGraph state corresponds
with the Audio Unit state.
So the state APIs for
AUGraph are Graph Open,
Close.
So AUGraph Open, when you call that,
it actually opens all of the audio units
represented by the nodes in the graph.
And Close closes all the audio units.
And correspondingly, Initialize,
Uninitialize,
it calls the audio unit functions.
And Start and Stop, same thing.
In addition, there are inspection
or introspection APIs.
AUGraph is Open, is Initialized,
is Running.
So you can determine what
state the graph is in.
This class data.
When an AU node is added to the graph,
it's possible to pass arbitrary data in
with a void star pointer and a length,
similar to the properties.
And if you add this information,
this optional class info,
when the Audio Unit is opened,
a property call will be made on
the Audio Unit with this data.
and the Audio Unit is able to make use
of this data in any way that it wants.
There's no data format that's
defined currently for it.
But it's a way to maintain persistence
because when the graph is closed,
data can be gotten from the
Audio Unit and stored in the node.
So it can be recreated in the
same configuration that it was.
So, a little bit earlier I tried
to explain the notion of this
head Audio Unit in a graph.
In a very simple case,
you would have a chain of Audio Units.
Say you might have three.
First one connected to the second,
connected to the last one,
the third Audio Unit,
which is maybe an output device.
And this last one represents
the head of the graph.
And we talked about the pole model.
The Head Audio Unit is very important
because it controls the hardware.
It controls whether processing is
being pulled through the graph or not.
There are special Audio Unit APIs,
Audio Unit Start and Stop,
which I talked about before.
The AU Graph has corresponding calls,
AU Graph Start and Stop.
Okay, done talking about
Audio Units and AUGraph.
So finally I'm going to
talk about some Sequencing
Services for performing scheduling.
A few slides back I had a diagram
up showing the Schedule Render
Model where in step one you schedule
events to Audio Units and secondly
you would render a slice of audio.
The Music Sequencing Services actually
would be one mechanism where
the scheduling could occur.
It's a simple API for creating and
editing multi-track MIDI sequences.
Individual events in the tracks
can address Audio Units and
Software Synthesizer Music Devices.
It provides a runtime for the
playback of these sequences and has
a bunch of APIs for doing live edits,
cut, copy, paste, merge,
this type of thing.
So while the sequence is playing,
you can be editing.
It's important in a sequence or
application to be able to do that.
For those developers who already have a
sequencing engine in their application,
this set of APIs might
not be so interesting.
But for somebody developing
a new application,
because the APIs are there for
doing the basic edits and for
actually providing the runtime system
for playing back the sequences.
It's only necessary to write a UI.
[Transcript missing]
The Music Player is the highest level
object and it provides transport.
So you can seek the sequence to
a particular time and start the
sequence playing and stop the sequence
playing with the Music Player.
provides the appropriate synchronization
between host-based processing and MIDI.
Music Sequence is a next level object.
A Music Sequence contains
multiple playback tracks,
which are called Music Tracks.
Each Music Track contains
a series of time-ordered,
time-stamped events.
Each Music Track with these events
addresses a particular AU node in the
AU Graph that we spoke about before.
So for instance, if you have a graph
with a software synth,
there would be a node
representing the software synth,
and one of these tracks
might be addressing its
events to the software synth.
There might be another
audio unit in the graph,
which is a filter of some kind.
There might be another track which is
addressing parameter changes to the
filter to sweep the filter cutoff.
There are also attributes to the track,
Mute and Solo, as I said before.
You can set up the loop length,
number of repetitions of the loop,
and also offset the start of the
track relative to the other tracks.
There are several
different types of events.
The most basic one is MIDI Note Message.
It's MIDI Note Number with velocity,
MIDI Channel, and a duration.
The Note Off is not a
music event as such.
It's implied in this
MIDI Note Message using the duration.
There's a MIDI Channel Message for
all the other channel messages.
There's Raw Data for System Exclusive.
There's a Tempo Event for
doing tempo changes.
And there's this Extended Note API,
which is very much like
the MIDI Note Message,
but it provides for more sophisticated
control in esoteric applications.
MIDI Note Event only has a
Note Number and a velocity and a
MIDI Channel associated with it.
This Extended Note Event allows
for an arbitrary number of
floating point arguments to be
associated with the MIDI Note.
There's a Tempo Event for
doing Tempo Changes and
there's this Extended Note API,
which is very much like
the MIDI Note Message,
but it provides for more sophisticated
control in esoteric applications.
instantiation of a note.
Not everybody may be interested in that,
but it's there.
The Extended Control represents a
32-bit floating point parameter change.
And ultimately, it may end up calling
Audio Unit Set Parameter at exactly the
right moment in the audio processing.
For sweeping filter,
for changing volumes, for panning,
positioning audio,
all different kinds of parameter changes.
There's also a User Event where
arbitrary data can be placed
and a Meta Event for MIDI.
So here's one example.
There's an API corresponding to
each one of these types of events.
And all of them are very
similar to this one.
So I'm just going to go over the one.
This is how you add a MIDI note event.
The first argument is the music
track you're adding the event to.
The second argument,
I think they got the arguments
lined up a little bit funny.
But the second argument,
if you can make sense of that,
is the timestamp.
It's 32 bit.
Actually, I think it's a 64 bit.
It's a double precision
timestamp representing the beat.
And then you have a
pointer to a structure,
the MIDI note message structure,
which essentially just
has the note number,
velocity, MIDI channel,
and the duration of the note in it.
So this is a diagram showing how
you can have a Music Sequence
with multiple tracks,
three in this case,
where each track is addressing a
separate Audio Unit in an AU Graph.
This corresponds with
the previous diagram,
the two-phase schedule render model,
if you remember.
There are some editing APIs for copy,
cut, paste, this type of thing.
And I think if you look in the
musicplayer.h header file in
the Audio Toolbox framework,
it will be very clear how to use these.
One of the lowest level objects
in Music Sequencing Services is
the Music Event Iterator.
It allows you to actually walk
through the events in a track,
see what they are.
It could be useful if you're
writing a sequencer application,
you're writing the UI sitting
on top of this engine for just
walking through the events,
seeing what they are,
so you can display them.
Also, if you want to create custom
editing operations on track,
you could use this Music Event Iterator
to walk through all of the events
in a particular time range.
So there are a couple different
APIs for dealing with these iterators.
The Music Event Iterator
is a first class object,
so you create it with new and dispose.
And you can seek the iterator to
a particular point in the track.
It finds the first event at or after
the time that you're seeking to.
You can move the iterator one event
forward in time with next event,
one event previous with previous event.
And you can actually ask the
iterator if it's at the end or
beginning of a track with has
previous event and has next event.
Then the Music Event Iterator
Get Event Info function can be
used to find out what type of
events you have at that point.
So you can find out
what the event type is,
what time the event occurs at,
and you get a void star pointer which you
cast to the appropriate event type to get
access to the particulars of that event.
For instance, if it's a MIDI note event,
you can find out what its note number is,
and so on.
You can delete an event at the
point where the iterator is,
or you can change the event's time.
Okay, I'm going to play a demo.
It's kind of a little bit vague
what I'm trying to illustrate here,
but I think what I'm trying to show is
how all of these services work together.
So, in the example, I've created a graph.
I have a software synth,
a DLS music device that's loaded up
with a 12-string guitar sample bank,
and it's playing through kind
of an arpeggio really quickly.
And then I have some additional
audio units in the graph.
I think there's a digital delay in there.
There's a look-ahead limiter node
to keep the volume pretty steady.
And there's a reverb at the end.
And I also have a bandpass filter in the
graph whose center frequency I'm sweeping
using the Music Sequencing Services.
So I've set up a music sequence,
and I have one of the tracks
addressing the node in the graph,
which is the bandpass filter,
and sweeping that around.
And it basically just ends up sounding
like some kind of ethereal wash.
But you should hear that there are these
kind of filter sweeps going in and out,
and there's a reverb in there for sure.
Let's see if I can wake this
machine up and get this going here.
Okay, got my cursor.
Unfortunately,
it's not nearly as impressive
as Jeff Moore's multi-channel
demo the other day,
but this will give you an idea.
Okay, I'm only launching an
application actually.
It's nothing too visual,
it's just to hear.
But I'll show you.
Double click,
and you should hear something.
But it's showing all the parts of
the system that I talked about.
And I think, Bill?
I'd like Bill Stewart to come up and he's
going to show us some more demonstrations
and talk about the Java interfaces.
I thought I'd make mention that all
of that sound you heard was just some
notes coming from the 12-string guitar.
So it's pretty interesting, I think.
Now, if I can have the demo machine back.
I've got to get my mouse here somewhere.
[Transcript missing]
This is cool, I can just show you
what I want to show you.
So this is my Java application.
and do we have sound
coming out from this?
I'll very quickly walk through
the code with you after this.
Basically,
I'm using a sound font that we got,
the same sound font that
Chris is using from Emu,
which is a 12-string guitar.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm going to quit this guy and
let me just bring up the project.
You have to just
[Transcript missing]
So there's a bunch of stuff here just
to sort of set the thing running.
I'm loading the sound bank here which
I've just installed with Mac OS X.
We also wanted to make sure that there
were directories that were available
as standard places for you to put
standard resources that you may want to
share between different applications.
So in this case I'm putting the sound
bank in the /library/audio/sounds/banks
and then this is the name
of the sound file here.
And there's also a mirror
of this directory in the
user's directory as well.
So sound banks that were stored
here would be available to any
user that came onto the machine.
So you might imagine like a lab
where you could have a setup that
you want available to every user.
And then individual users can
have their own sound bank.
So you might imagine like a lab
where you could have a setup that
you want available to every user.
sandbanks in their own
user version of this thing.
And there are fine folder constants
that you can use for look for these
in systems that have been localized.
There are other folders for Audio Units
if you want to make them available
for different types of sounds.
There's a whole bunch of MIDI stuff
here that I'll go through later on.
What I want to show you is
basically how the graph is set up.
[Transcript missing]
constructor here is creating the graph
and that just calls through to the
C API to create the graph here and
then this is me creating to synth two
nodes one for the DLS music device and
I give it a component description and
I already know what I'm looking for here
I could use the fine component staff
to actually hunt around for components
I'm just creating two nodes I'm creating
a music device and I'm going to use
the DLS synth as the that one for that
you know we're very hopeful to see other
music devices from you guys like you
know some acoustic modeling synthesizer
devices and all that kind of stuff and
if I get the mouse pad here and then the
second one is the default output unit
I'm just going to create that because
I want the sound to actually come out of
the computer and then to connect those
I just tell the graph to connect the node
and the output unit to the DLS synth and
then I'm going to create the DLS synth
and then I'm going to create the
DLS synth and then I'm going to create
the DLS synth and then I'm going to
create the DLS synth and then I'm going
to create the DLS synth and then I'm
going to create the DLS synth and then
I'm going to create the output from the
synth into the input of the output node.
And just to show you that there's
some stuff going on with the graph,
after I create the graph,
I'm going to get the node count
here and I get the index node
starting from zero to the number
of nodes and I print that out.
And I can show you what
that guy looks like.
So you can see there that it's
telling me I've got two nodes and
there's a component which is the music
node and the default output node.
And I've lost my mouse again,
there it is.
Okay, so after I do the
connection of the nodes,
I'm going to open the graph.
And this will open the audio
units and that will actually,
it's really a constructor.
Until you do open on the graph,
you don't have an audio unit,
you just have the node itself.
It's an abstract
representation of the graph.
So when I open the graph,
I can ask the graph to give me
the audio unit that's associated
with a particular node.
And if we have a look back up here,
you'd see that I had
kept this guy around.
I could actually go and look in the
graph and find out the nodes here
and I could ask it for information.
But I've kept this node here,
so I know that what I want to
do is get the music device,
which is a subclass of audio
unit for that particular node.
And what we do in the core audio
Java APIs is we actually give you
the subclasses that correspond to the
extensions of the component selectors.
So you could have a basic audio unit,
which is your parent class,
and you've got an extension of
that with your output audio unit.
Another extension is the music device.
And that, in component terms,
just provides additional
component selectors,
additional functionality.
If I've specified a set of components,
I can just add them to
the component selectors.
And if I've specified a sound bank,
which I'd be kind of a
bit lame if I didn't,
then I'm going to set the property
of the sound bank on the music synth.
And this is a convenience
routine in Java.
It does the same thing as what
Chris showed in the C file.
And it just takes the Java file object.
It does all the necessary
conversions to the native
structures and instantiates that.
And you notice that I'm doing
this when I've opened the graph
but before I initialize it.
So this is one of these things
where this is a property that
we want the synth to have.
We want the synthesizer to
have when it's initialized.
And until the synth is initialized,
it's not going to try to use a particular
sound bank until you've initialized it.
And then just to get the
synth sort of up and running,
I'm going to set some default
volume and channel stuff.
And there's some commented at code
there I'm not going to worry about.
And because I want this to be responsive,
I quit it, didn't I?
Because I want this to be responsive,
what I'm actually doing at this point
is to get the Audio Device Output Unit,
which is the default output
unit that I'm sending out to.
From that guy,
I'm going to get the device
that it's attached to,
and I'm going to set its buffer size.
That's going to basically take
the default callback buffer,
which is about 11 milliseconds,
512 sample frames, and I'm going to set
that to 64 sample frames.
The responsiveness of the system
is about 1.5 milliseconds.
I create a memory object that
I can pass that information in,
and then I just set the output
property straight on the device.
I get the device from the Output Unit,
and it's actually a device output unit,
and I set the property to 64 frames,
which is 64 times 2,
because it's a stereo device, times 4,
which is the size of a float.
Of course, in Java,
you don't do size of float,
because it's Java, not C, I suppose.
Then I actually get
that property as well,
and I print it out, and you can see,
if I can find my mouse,
and you can see there that
it's telling me that the buffer
size for the IOPROC is 512,
which is what we'd expect, 64 by 2 by 4.
So that's all we do, and then after I've
set the buffer size up,
and I've initialized the synthesizer,
I then just start the graph,
and that will start the device.
It'll start pulling through the chain,
and away we go.
And then in the next session,
I'll go through how I -- I'll
set up the MIDI parsing stuff,
so that I can actually send
MIDI events to the music device.
So can we go back to slides?
Okay, so just some notes about the Java.
There's also a Java doc
available on the website.
We're also preparing a PDF of
just the Core Audio architecture
itself and that will be available
at the website early next week.
And as we stressed yesterday,
we sort of look at Core Audio as
basically an architecture that you
should understand how it works.
And that's really a
language neutral feature.
The Java and the C APIs represent the
same API to the same functionality
that's implemented underneath and
in a variety of different ways.
So we also have a mailing list.
It's at list.apple.com.
It's called Core Audio API.
And we welcome you to involve
yourself in that mailing list.
And it's a good way to send
information to us and we'll
answer questions on that list.
And there's a website.
I don't know if it's completely up yet.
If it's not up today,
it will be over the next few days.
developer.apple.com/audio.
There are some related sessions for the
DVD viewers of this wonderful thing.
The next session, which should be MIDI,
is at 5:00 today.
Audio Services and Mac OS X was
yesterday and there's the
Sound Networking Games before this one.
If you have any questions
related to FireWire and USB,
there's a lot of USB audio devices and
MIDI devices and stuff that's coming out,
you can contact Craig Keithley,
Keithley@apple.com.
If you're interested in seeding,
we're obviously constantly
working on these technologies.
If you're interested in getting access
to that before we release it publicly,
you can contact us at
audio@apple.com or talk to your
Developer Relations Manager and
inquire about seeding.